Agni

O Agni, you are Indra, the mighty Lord of all beings; you are adorable Vishnu of immense sweep; O Brahmanaspati (Agni, Lord of prayers); you are Brihaspati, the possessor or wealth; O Ordainer (Agni), you are fill of wisdom. Rigveda 2.1.3

O Agni, you are king Varuna, the upholder of all laws; you are to be adored as Mitra who accomplishes wonderful acts; you are Aryaman, the Lord of the discernible world, whose liberality is enjoyed by all; O God Agni, you are Amsa, who is ever eager to grant favors at the sacrifice. Rigveda 2.1.4

O Agni, as Tvastr you grant good sons to the devotee; O Master of plants and possessor of Mitra’s greatness, we desire your kinship. Being possessed of fast speed, you grant us the wealth of good horses. Abounding in good riches, you are the valorous strength of the leaders of men. Rigveda 2.1.5

O Agni, you are Rudra, the powerful god of the great Heaven; you are the valorous strength of the Maruts; you control nourishment; you move with the ruddy windes (i.e., with red flames); you bring happiness to the household; as Pushan you yourself protect your worshippers. Rigveda 2.1.6

O Agni! You are the giver of wealth to your worshipper; you are the god Savitr, the bestower of delightful gigts; O King (Agni), as Bhaga you govern riches; and you protect that person who worships you in his house. Rigveda 2.1.7

Indra

I will declare in the heroic deeds of Indra, which were the foremost ones accomplished by the wielder of the thunderbolt. He slew the (rain-blocking) snake (Vrtra), then discharged the waters, and cleft apart the bellies of the clouds. Rigveda 1.32.1

He, O men, is Indra whose command is obeyed by horses, cows, villages and chariots. He created the sun and the Dawn. He is the guide of the waters. Rigveda 2.12.7

Both Heaven and Earth bow down before him. Even the mountains tremble before His might. He, o men, is Indra who is famed as the Soma drinker, lightning-armed, and wielder of thunderbolt. Rigveda 2.12.13

O Indra! In your bounty you nourish the blooming and fruit –bearing plants and maintain the flow of rivers according to your eternal law. You, yourself being immense, have created in every direction and matchless luminaries of Heaven. So you are praiseworthy indeed. Rigveda 2.13.7

Years and months do not age Him, nor do days enfeeble Indra. May the self of this exalted Lord ever increase, being celebrated by lauds and hymns of praise. Rigveda 6.24.7

Indra has become a model for every form in the Universe. That form of Indra is his manifestation for all to see. Through His mystic powers Indra appears in so many forms. The Golden horses (i.e., the shining rays) yoked to his chariot are a thousand (i.e., they are countless) in number. Rigveda 6.47.18

O Indra! Even if there be a hundred Heavens and a hundred Earths, they cannot match you; nor can, O thunderbolt wielder! A thousand suns together with both the worlds, come up, to your greatness. Rigveda 8.70.5

Aditi

Aditi is heaven, Aditi is atmosphere, Aditi is mother, father and son; Aditi is all gods; Aditi is the people of the five regions of the Earth. Aditi is all that has come into being and all that which will come into being. Rigveda 1.89.10

We invoke for our protection Aditi, the mighty mother of the righteous, the protector of the eternal Universal order of the powerful, undecaying, extending far and wide, good protection and gracious guide. Madhyandina Yajurveda 21.5; Taittiriya Samhita 1.5.11.5; Maitrayani Samhita 4.10.1; Kathaka Samhita 30.4; Atharvaveda (Shaunakiya) 7.6.2

Ashwins

O Asvins! You grant good luck (the bliss of marriage) to a maiden growing old in her father’s house; you are the protectors of the famished and neglected people; and you are the healers of the blind, debilitated and diseased persons. Rigveda 10.39.3

Maruts

The shining and mighty Maruts undoubtedly bring incessant rains even to the desert. Rigveda 1.38.7
When the rain is let loose by the Maruts, the lightening roars like a bellowing cow and follows like a cow that accompanies her calf. Rigveda 1.38.8
When the Maruts drench the earth with a water laden cloud, they create darkness even during day time. Rigveda 1.38.9

O Maruts! The Mortal whom you protect through your favor, surpasses people in strength, wins victory with his steeds, obtains wealth with his men, attains honorable wisdom, and fully prospers. Rigveda 1.64.13

O Maruts! The Mortal whom you guide on the right path, is neither overpowered, nor killed, nor distressed, nor harmed whether he be a Rishi or a King. Rigveda 5.54.7


Mitra

Mitra sustains all deities and living beings; and the people of the five regions of the Earth approach him for help. Rigveda 3.59.1

Parjanya (Rain Cloud)

Invoke the mighty one with these verses of praise. Extol Parjanya and pray to him with obeisance. The thundering god, who quickly bestows gifts and sheds rain, lay seeds in the plants for germination. Rigveda 5.83.1

He lashes at the trees and destroys the demons (elements injurious to health). The whole world is afraid of him who wields the mighty weapon. When thundering Parjanya strikes the evil-doers, even a sinless person flees from the raining cloud. Rigveda 5.83.2

Like a charioteer lashing at his horses with a whip, Parjanya makes visible his messengers of rain. The roarings of the lion arise from afar, when Parjanya fills the slky with rainy clouds. Rigveda 5.83.3

The winds blow violently, the lightnings flash, the plants shoot up, the firmament swells with rain, and there is nourishment for the whole world, when Parjanya fertilizes the earth with showers. Rigveda 5.83.4

O Parjanya, grant us full protection. In obedience to your command the earth moves down, the hoofed animals leap about, and the plants become omniform. Rigveda 5.83.5

Hymns to Ratri Devi

The approaching night, the goddess, has surveyed many places with her eyes (i.e., with the starts and the moon), and she has adorned herself with all beauties. Rigveda 10.127.1

The immortal goddess has pervaded all places high and low, and she dispels darkness with her light. Rigveda 10.127.2

The advancing goddess has prepared the way for her sister Dawn, and then darkness disappears. Rigveda 10.127.3

For us you are so benevolent today. On your arrival we have entered our houses, just as birds resort to their nests on a tree. Rigveda 10.127.

The villagers have gone to rest in their dwellings, and so have repaired the beasts and birds. Even the greedy hawks have retired to rest. Rigveda 10.127.5

Soma

The earth is upheld by truth; the Heaven is supported by the sun; the Adityas stay firm in their position because of the eternal Universal order; and Soma is placed in the Heaven by the eternal Universal Order. Rigveda 10.85.1
The Adityas are powerful due to Soma, the Earth is mighty because of Soma, and Soma has got his place in Heaven in the midst of these Nakshatras. Rigveda 10.85.2
When they extract the juice of the plant, he who drinks its juice regards the polant as Soma, but no one can consume that Soma which the possessors of divine knowledge know to be true Soma. Rigveda 10.85.3

Soma clothes the naked, heals the sick, and enables the blind to see and the lame to walk. Rigveda 8.79.2

Hymns to Surya
 
The brilliant face of the sun, the eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni, has risen. The sun, the soul of the movable and the immovable creation, has filled heaven, Earth and Atmosphere with light. Rigveda 1.115.1

O Mitra and Varuna, here rises this sun, the beholder of men, ascending both Heaven and Earth. The sun, the protector of the moving and the unmoving world rises, surveying the upright and evil deeds of mortals. Rigveda 7.60.2

The far seeing sun, the jewel of Heaven, is rising. The shining one with a distant goal is moving fast. All people aroused by the sun have become active, doing their assigned jobs. Rigveda 7.63.4

O Surya, Dispel from us all penury, negligence (in the performance of our religious duties), disease and evil dreams, with that light of yours with which you dispel darkness, and with that luster of yours with which you arouse the mobile creatures to activity. Rigveda 10.37.4

Savitr

The far sighted god assumes all forms, and bestows happiness on bipeds and quadrupeds. Adorable Savitr surveys the highest point of heaven, and shines following the appearance of Dawn.  Rigveda 5.81.2

The gods follow the appearance of the god Savitr and attain greatness through his power. The resplendent god Savitr has measured out the terrestrial regions by his greatness. Rigveda 5.81.3

O Savitr! You reach the three regions of light and unite with the rays of the sun. O god Savitr! You move round the night on both sides (i.e., before the beginning and after the end of the night) and you become Mitra (i.e., dear to all) on account of your beneficial laws. Rigveda 4.81.4

Approaching through dark atmosphere and bringing to rest the immortal and the mortal, Savitr comes here in his golden chariot, seeing all creatures. Rigveda 1.35.2

Savitr has surveyed the 8 points (directions) of the earth, the three desert lands stretching across a long distance, and the seven rivers. The golden eyed Savitr has arrived, bestowing delightful gifts on the worshipper. Rigveda 1.35.8

The golden-handed and far-seeing Savitr traverses between Heaven and Earth. He removes diseases, guides the sun and pervades Heaven through the dark atmosphere. Rigveda 1.35.9

O Savitr! You impel the Maruts lead by Indra, in the form of watery abodes, for these vast clouds. As and when the flying clouds spread out in various directions, they pause for your command. Rigveda 4.54.5

Hymns to Usha

Having surveyed the whole world, the goddess (Ushas) shines far and wide with her gaze at the west. Awakening every living creature to activity, she has aroused the voice of every thinker. Rigveda 1.92.9

The ancient goddess, being born again and again, and adorning herself with the same (brilliant) color, wastes away the life of mortals like stakes which are diminished by the crafty gambler. Rigveda 1.92.10

She has woken up, unveiling the farthest points of heaven. She drives her sister (Night) far away. Diminishing the years of human life, the wife of the sun shines with her luster. Rigveda 1.92.11

This best light among the lights has come. The all-pervading brilliant light has appeared. Impelled to obey the command of Savitr, the Night has vacated her place for the Dawn. Rigveda 1.113.1

Gone are those mortals who beheld the shining Dawn in the earlier ages. Now we behold her brightness; new generations are coming who will see her in the times to come. Rigveda 1.113.11

The goddess Dawn has eternally shown before, and the bounteous goddess shines here today. So will she shine in future. The ageless and immortal Dawn moves on according to her eternal laws. Rigveda 1.113.13

The Dawn has illumined the paths of people, awakening the five human settlements. She has spread her luster with beautiful rays, and the sun has revealed through his light both Heaven and Earth. Rigveda 7.79.1

Varuna

Varuna knows the path of the birds flying in the air. He knows the course of the ships in theOcean. Rigveda 1.25.7

Being omniscient, Varuna looks at all the wonderful acts which have been done and which will be done in future. Rigveda 1.25.11

Varuna has spread the atmosphere over the trees, put speed in horses, and milk in kine. He has placed intellect in hearts, fire in the waters, the sun in the sky and Soma in the cloud. Rigveda 5.85.2

Offer a solemn, profound and pleasing hymn of praise to the renowned Universal ruler Varuna who has spread the earth as a carpet for the sun, just as a Soma preparer spreads a hide (for the extraction of the juice). Rigveda 5.85.1

Varuna, the King of the whole world, has poured out a big bellied vessel i.e., the cloud, with downward opening; and thereby he waters the heaven, the Earth and the Atmosphere, just as rain drenches barley crop. Rigveda 5.85.3

Whenever Varuna desires milk (i.e., prosperity for the living beings), he drenches the earth and the Heaven; and then the mountains clothe themselves with water laden clouds, the Maruts (rain bringing winds) become vigorous and loosen the clouds to rain. Rigveda 5.85.4

I will declare the great and the mysterious power of the renowned and the powerful god Varuna, who standing in the firmament, has measured the Earth with the sun (i.e., with the rays of the sun) as if with a measuring rod. Rigveda 5.85.5

Vata

Now I extol the greatness of the wind’s chariot. Its sound moves shattering and thundering. Touching the sky, the wind blows producing ruddy hues; and it also moves along the earth, scattering dust. Rigveda 10.168.1

The hosts of the wind (i.e., the rain-waters) speed together and go to him (the wind) as maidens flock to a festive concourse. United with them the god moves on the same chariot. He is the king of the whole world. Rigveda 10.168.2

Speeding along his paths in the atmosphere, the wind never rests for a single day. He is the first-born friend of waters, observing eternal order. Where was he born? Whence has he arisen? Rigveda 10.168.3

Breath of the gods and the source of Creation, this god moves according to his will. His sounds are heard, but his form is not seen. Let us worship that Vata with oblation. Rigveda 10.163.4

Vishnu

O Vishnu! Men do not comprehend your greatness, as you are growing through your own self beyond all measure. We, human beings, know fro the Earth only two regions of the Universe, i.e., the Earth and the atmosphere, whereas O God! You know the highest region of the Universe. Rigveda 7.99.1

O God Vishnu! None of those who are born or who were born in the past has reached the farthest limit of your greatness. You have propped the vast and high heaven and fixed the eastern horizon of the Earth. Rigveda 7.99.2

In observance of laws from here (i.e., from the Heaven), Vishnu the infallible guardian, took three steps. Rigveda 1.22.18

The Sages always behold the highest step of Vishnu which is like an extended eye in the sky. Rigveda 1.22.30

LOVE

Atharvaveda (Shaunakiya Samhita) III.30.1-7

The union of hearts and minds
and freedom from hate I'll bring you.
Love one another as the cow
loves the calf that she has borne. || 1 ||

Let son be loyal to father
and of one mind with his mother.
Let wife speak to husband words
that are honey sweet and gentle. || 2 ||

Let not brother hate a brother,
nor a sister hate a sister,
unanimous, united in aims,
speak you words with friendliness. || 3 ||

I will make the prayer for that concord among men at home
by which Devas do not separate, nor ever hate one another || 4 ||

Be not parted - growing old, taking thought,
thriving together, moving under a common yoke,
come speaking sweetly to one another;
I'll make you have one aim and be of one mind. || 5 ||

Common be your water-store, common your share of food;
I bind you together to a common yoke,
United, gather around the sacrificial fire
like spokes around the nave of a wheel. || 6 ||

With your common desire I'll make you all
have one aim, be of one mind, following one leader,
like Devas who preserve their immortality.
Morn and eve may there always be a loving heart in you. || 7 ||

Mind

Rigveda 5.81.1
Rigveda 10.57.4
Rigveda 10.57.6
Samaveda (Kauthuma) 697
Yajurveda (Madhyandina) 34.1-6

Medha Sukta (Rigveda Khila 4.8.1-9)

The Angirases (have given) me intelligence. The seven sages have given me intelligence and Indra and Agni (have given me) intelligence. May the disposer give me intelligence. ||1||

May King Varuna (bestow) intelligence on me. May goddess Sarasvati (bestow) intelligence on me. May the two gods Asvina having garlands of lotuses bestow intelligence on me. ||2||

The intelligence which (rests) among Apsarases, the mind which (stays) in the Gandharvas, the intelligence which is divine as well as human, may that enter me here. ||3||

What I have learnt (from the teacher) may be gratified, what I am learning (-of that I) should have potency. I listen to the knowledge in me which is already heard. May I be in the company of the vow. May we be united with Brahman. ||4||

O wise man! My body (and) my speech is full of sweet. I milk it. I have grown. This is Surya, (you) be the axle pin of the Brahman. Do not discard my knowledge. ||5||

May be goddess Medha, throbbing in my mind, liked by the Gandharva, gladdening for us. Proclaim Medha for me, proclaim glory for me. Being active and practicing (religion), may I be possessed of Medha. ||6||

I have gone to the invulnerable lord of the assembly the dear one coveted by Indra, to Medha, the conquerer. ||7||

May I be possessed of Medha, having good thoughts, having a good face, having a mind full of shraddha, having thoughts about shraddha, having good intentions, possessing great fame, retainer (of the knowledge), prominent speaker in the application of this (mantra) with a desire for the lord. ||8||

Medha, upon who the hosts of gods and manes wait, with that Medha, O Agni, make me possessed of intelligence today. ||9||

Monotheism

Rigveda 1.164.46
Rigveda 6.45.16
Rigveda 8.1.1
Rigveda 
Rigveda 10.121.1-10
Yajurveda (Madhyandina) 32.1
Atharvaveda (Shaunakiya) 10.7.32
Atharvaveda (Shaunakiya) 10.7.33
Atharvaveda (Shaunakiya) 10.7.34
Atharvaveda (Shaunakiya) 13.4.16-19

That (Supreme Being) is Agni; that is the sun; that is the wind; that is the moon; that is light; that is Brahman; and that is Prajapati. Madhyandina Yajurveda 32.1

They call Him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, and he is the Divine good winged bird (the sun with beautiful rays). The sages describe one and the same Divine Being in various ways and call it Agni, Yama and Matarisvan. Rigveda 1.164.46

Having omnipresent eyes, faces, arms and feet, God alone welds together with his arms and rays the various elements of the Universe. Rigveda 10.81.3

He is our Father, Creator and Ordainer knows all the places and all creatures. He alone is the name giver of the gods. The other beings approach him to enquire about Him. Rigveda 10.82.3

That Supreme Power is more exalted than the Heaven, the Earth and is superior to the powerful deities. What was that which the waters received as the first germ of creation and at which all the deities looked together? Rigveda 10.82.5

There are, no doubt, two forms of Brahman- one having a form and the other formeless. The Mortal and the immortal. The stationary and the moving. The discernible and the indiscernible. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 2.3.1

That under which the year revolves with its days, the gods worship that as the light of lights and as life immortal, that in which the people of all the five regions of the Earth and space are established, that alone I regard as the Soul; known that immortal Brahman, I too am immortal. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. 4.4.16-17

On account of superb excellence if the Divinity, one soul (i.e., the All-pervading Soul) is extolled in various ways. The other (manifest) gods are just like the limbs of the Great Soul, the secondary members of the body. The specialists in this branch of study observe that the Rishis praise the beings according to the plurality and Universality of their intrinsic nature. The gods are (figuratively described in the Veda as) born from each other (e.g., Rigveda 10.72.4). The gods are the primary source of each other. They owe their birth, i.e., coming into being, to their specific functions as well as to the (Universal) Soul. Soul alone is their chariot, horse, weapon and arrow, i.e., these things which are not different from the soul are only figurative appellations in their descriptions. Nirukta 7.4

Nature of God

Atharvaveda (Shaunakiya) IV.16
The great Ruler of these Worlds
Beholds as if from near at hand 
The man who acts and thinks like a thief,
The wise know all this of him. II 1 II

He who dwells, walks or moves secretly,
Who goes to bed or awakes secretly,
When with another he takes secret counsel,
Varuna (Almighty God), like a king, knows all
He is present there as the third. II 2 II

This earth belongs to Varuna, the King,
And the heavens with their ends far apart.
The two seas (the sky and ocean) are as His loins,
And He is present in the small water drop. II 3 II

He, who should flee far beyond the sky,
Even he cannot escape Varuna, the King.
His envoys proceed from heaven towards the world,
With a thousand eyes they overlook this earth. II 4 II

God, the King of the Universe, sees all this
What is between the heaven and the earth, and what is beyond.
He has counted the twinklings of the eyes of men.
As a player throws down the dice, He settles all things (irrevocable). II 5 II

May Thy fatal snares that stand spread out
Stretched seven by seven and threefold,
Catch the man who tells a lie,
But pass by him who speaks the truth. II 6 II

With a hundred nooses bind him, O God,
Let him not who lies, escape Thee, Looker on Men.
Let the mean fellow sit stretching his belly
Like a cask of which the bands are cut. II 7 II

Varuna is He that exists alongside,
Varuna is He that exists crosswise,
Varuna is of our land, and yet also of other lands,
Varuna is the divine, Varuna is the humane. II 8 II


Hiranyagarbha Sukta
Rigveda X.121.1-10
In the beginning, there existed God, the Source of all light. He was the One Lord of created beings. He upholds this earth and the heavens. He, it is to Whom we offer our prayers. II 1 II

He, who is the Giver of spiritual knowledge and the Giver of strength; Whom the world worships; Whose command all learned men obey; Whose shelter is immortality; Whose shadow is death. He, it is to Whom we offer our prayers. II 2 II

He, Who by His greatness is the One Sole King of the animate and inanimate world; Who is the Creator and Lord of all men and beasts. He, it is to Whom we offer our prayers. II 3 II

Whose greatness these snowy mountains and the ocean with its waters proclaim; Whose arms are these vast regions. He, it is to Whom we offer our prayers. II 4 II

By Whom the heavenly bodies are uplifted and the earth is made stable; by Whom the firmament and heaven are established; Who pervades the entire space by His spiritual essence. He, it is to whom we offer our prayers. II 5 II

To Whom the earth and the heavens look up, being upheld by his protection and moved by His will; in Whom the sun rises and shines forth. He, it is to Whom we shall offer our prayers. II 6 II

When this vast matter producing an igneous condition, and holding in its womb this universe, manifested itself, then. He was the One Life of all shining beings. He, it is to Whom we offer our prayers. II 7 II

He, Who in His greatness looked upon that diffused matter possessed of heat and energy, and producing this cosmos; Who is the One Supreme Lord of bright things and learned men. He, it is to Whom we offer our prayers. II 8 II

May the Lord of Truth and Righteousness, Creator of the earth, Who has also created the heavens, and Who manifested the vast and shining matter; May He not inflict pain upon us. He, it is to Whom we offer our prayers. II 9 II

O Lord of all creatures! None other than Thee can control and govern all these created things. May the things, desiring which we pray to Thee, by ours by Thy grace. May we be lords of all good things in this world. II 10 II









